---
title: 7 days on The Isles of Scilly
date: 2017-08-01
tags:
  - travel
  - isles of scilly
  - cornwall
---

Each morning throughout the summer a small passenger ferry departs from the quay in Penzance. Aboard you'll find just under five hundred seats, some beds, two cafés, a canteen area and several thousand small white bags in dispensers attached to the bulkheads.

This is the *RMV Scillonian III*. She's been transporting excited — and occasionally green — tourists from the mainland to the Isles of Scilly since 1977. It's a journey that Katie and I have made almost every year since we first met, and her for years before that. 

There are, of course, other more comfortable ways to get to the Scillies: A small 7 seater plane dubbed *Skybus* that flies from Lands End, Newquay or Exeter. There was also a helicopter operated by British International which was always our favourite method of transport, but this ceased operation in 2012. 

Alas, the weather will often conspire against us, grounding all light aircraft, and all too unexpectedly we've found ourselves making our way to Penzance for a ride on the *vomit commit*. 

We’ve visited these islands many times, with friends, as a couple, and more recently as a family. These are 7 days plucked from my memories of all those days on Scilly, put together mixed-up and out-of-order, as is so often the way with memories... 

## Day one

Boarding the boat, we secure our regular spot on the middle deck, near the back doors on — what a nautical friend informed me is — the port side. This is the ideal spot for Katie to sit as motionless as possible and endure any rough crossing.

Knowing the best thing to do is leave her alone it also avails me of an escape route to the upper outside deck. From here  its not unusual to spot huge shoals of fish or even dolphins in the wake of the massive engines. In rough seas, this is also the optimal location to enjoy the power of the seas, and to keep an eye on the horizon. 

At capacity the Scillonian carries 485 souls who line the upper deck like birds on a telephone line. Its a busy place to be, people perched atop benches, leaning on the rigging, or hanging over the rails. 

Whatever may come, we’re all now locked together for the two hour and forty-five minute trip. Knowing-looks are often passed over the heads of the unsuspecting day trippers by those of us who’ve travelled this way before. “Poor sods” our brief eye contact seems to say, as we don our pressure point travel bands and pop an array of chemical remedies for *mal de mare*.

All this preparation is, with any luck, for naught. Once we’ve rounded Gwennap Head off Lands End, and are in full steam towards the islands most of the more unpleasant effects of the sea are behind us. On a sunny day there’s no better way to arrive on Scilly than by boat.

What’s astonishing is the speed at which the passengers disappear once we’ve docked at St Mary’s harbour. A number of passengers hang around on the quay waiting to catch the smaller tender boats to the off-islands. Most make the happy walk past the Mermaid pub and up Hugh Street filtering off down the various alleyways and lanes to their holiday accommodations. 

This is the last we see of our fellow sea-ravaged friends until the we meet again a week later at the check-in desk back on the quay. 

At any one time throughout the summer there must be thousands of visitors on the islands and yet it doesn’t ever feel busy. Scilly is full of secret places, quite beaches and deserted coves. 

Our journey takes us via the Korvorna Café (to pick up our first pasty of the holiday), through the cut-through at Well Lane, over Garrison Lane and onto Littleporth to where our friend’s mum has a place that looks out over Porthcressa Beach.

Fighting our way through the garden, amazingly overgrown with countless species that are native to Scilly, we climb the few steps to the back door. Naturally this is unlocked. 

Dumping whatever bags we’re carrying in the doorway, we rush through the hall and into the front of the house. Where there’s 
_that_ window, with _that_ view. Flinging open the front door, we sink into various bits of unmatched garden furniture and enjoy our pasties in silence, taking in the view, all the trails of the morning forgotten.

Later we’ll enjoy a fish and chip supper and maybe a few beers either in one of the (many) local pubs or, more recently, in the house while _Roo_ sleeps soundly. Pretty soon we’ll be in the land of nod ourselves. Happy, excited for tomorrow.

## Day two

_In 2017, Katie, Roo and I visited Scilly along with our friends Cath and David_

“Mummy! I want to get up now!” I turn over and look at my watch. 8:05, wow, she slept well. “Mummy!” OK, kid, give me a minute here. But Katie’s already out of bed and padding down the creaky corridor. “Shh, you’ll wake Cath and Dave” I hear Katie tell _Roo_. Rolling over I catch a glimpse of the sun steaming in at the window. Time to get up.

“Mummy, we on holy-day” _Roo_ confidently tells Katie as they by degrees make their way down the corridor, Katie taking significantly more care than _Roo_, who bounds like a demented rabbit.

I join my family in the Kitchen and take in the full beauty of the view. It truly is a gorgeous day. A quick check of the BBC’s weather app informs me today is a balmy 25 degrees with light winds. A lovely day for boating.

After breakfast we execute our plan: Today, we’re heading for St Martins. Five of us; intrepid seafarers stand on the quay, tickets in hand watching the _Sea King_ — expertly piloted by her skipper — draw alongside the waiting queue of passengers. 

Fraser Hicks, skipper extraordinaire, is for me as much a part of the islands as the land itself. Fraser captures the essence of an islander: Laid back, enjoying life with a quiet confidence. For as long as we’ve been coming here he’s been one of ten skippers of the St Mary’s Boatmen’s Association who ferry countless passengers between the islands. Its always a treat to discover that you’ll be travelling on the _Sea King_.

After landing at Higher Town the first port of call is [The Island Bakery](http://www.theislandbakery-stmartins.com/) for the day’s supplies. Fully stocked with pasties and cola cake we trundle up the single track road, over the brow of the hill before taking a path cut through a field overgrown with Scilly’s ubiquitous Bracken.

Of course the great swathe of white sand of Great Bay is almost deserted. Aside from a few families lounging here and there we’re the only people so finding a sheltered spot is easy. 

Beach days used to be much easier, but with _Roo_ in tow it now feels more like mobilising a beach assault. Once the shelter is set up, beach mats laid out and sun cream applied we unpack the various excavating tools. Thankfully she’s still a bit too small to want to bury daddy, so digging giant holes is the order of the day. _Roo_ takes up her position as site foreman and sets me and Dave about our task of digging several large holes and interconnecting trenches. Eventually the tide will come up and fill this carefully engineered system, much to _Roo’s_ delight, whereupon Dave and I will have to frantically shore-up walls and various dams. 

All too soon the site whistle sounds for lunch: “Lads! Lunchtime!” 

Sated, crumb covered, and chocolate stained we emerge from lunch. If _Roo_ will have a nap in the beach shelter, maybe we can have a relaxing hour catching up on some reading and resting our eyes. She doesn’t take much coaxing, exhausted from bossing us around, she’s happy to sleep.

One or two of us drift off too. It’s hard not to in the warmth of the day and with the rhythmic whoosh of the sea lapping at the beach. On waking, I feel the need to burn-off too much pasty. It’s time to break out the wetsuit and snorkel and explore the crystal clear waters.

Wet suit, booties, twat hat, flippers, mask and flippers. All the gear and no idea. Penguin-like I gingerly pick my way down to the shoreline and into the freezing waters of the Atlantic. When I’m waist deep I take a big breath and roll forward into the water, waiting for the cold water effect to pass I struggle the mask over my face and enter the underwater world.

Below the water barrier I instantly feel that I’m in another world. From the beach I must look like Manatee in distress, but down in my aquatic environment I feel like Jacques Cousteau about to discover some previously unimagined species. 

Further out the water is clear all the way to the bottom some 5 meters below where forests of Kelp shelter shoals of small fish. A sudden shot of panic as my lizard brain picks-up movement in my peripheral vision: A huge striped fish darts out of the Kelp. I follow at a distance. He comes to rest in a clearing and I’m able to float above him and just watch. I’d say we had a “moment” if I didn’t think that sounded like bullshit. 

“I saw a _mahoosive_ fish out there” I tell Katie, extending my arms to demonstrate its size. I add a good few centimetres in the tradition of men everywhere when talking about the size of things. “That’s nice dear” she replies “But we need to pack up and go or we’ll miss the last boat back”.

Everyone is quiet on the boat back to St Marys, even _Roo_ who is up on her knees so she can see over the side. Its hard not to get lost in the view, the ocean glinting like a million tiny diamonds, the twin islands of St. Agnes and Gugh slung low on the horizon. 

_Roo_ is asleep as soon as her head hits the pillow, which is perfect as David and Cath have kindly offered to babysit. This means that Katie and I get to go out for dinner. A great tradition on our visits to Scilly – perhaps _the_ tradition — is  partaking in a scone or two at Juliet’s Garden. Perched atop Porthlow it has spectacular views over Tresco. On a warm day, there’s nothing quite like sitting in Juliet’s Garden cramming copious amounts of cream-tea into ones face. 

Juliet isn’t just famed for her scones, she also runs a fantastic restaurant. Where, on arrival, we were served drinks in the garden whilst taking in the gorgeous sunset. Taking our seats inside, we were treated to an incredible three-course meal.

## Day three

Bumming / Drinking around the house on St Mary’s. Lately been visiting the diminishing number of things to do for toddlers. Walk around the Garrison?

Pub quiz at the Atlantic?

Gig racing.

## Day Four

_In 2014, we visited Scilly with our friends Cath, David and Emily._

The [Scilly Cart Co ](http://www.scillycart.co/) used to have a Facebook page on which it posts pictures, normally taken by disgruntled locals, of the bad driving and parking decisions taken by tourists when hiring a cart for the day. When you arrive at the Cart Co’s depot, you’re greeted with a display board of these photos followed by a pep-talk by the owner on the evils of annoying the locals with where you choose to park. 

With these words of warning rising in our ears Dave and I pulled out onto the main road, each of us determined to follow the rules to the letter. How we ended up attempting to break the land-speed record is anyone’s guess. One moment we were driving along sensibly, the next I’m bouncing up and down in my seat trying to squeeze every ounce of speed I could from our formula-Z cart. Needless to say, we weren’t very successful, and no traffic laws were violated.

After the girls were aboard, we set out along the Telegraph Road that circles the innards of the island. There was no plan beyond maybe finding a beach and most definitely finding somewhere for lunch. I’ve gotta admit that — despite appearances — driving a golf-buggy is crazy fun. So we kept driving, twice around the island in fact, before we eventually decided we needed some lunch, it having been now over an hour and a half since breakfast.

This was the birth of another great tradition: Lunch at [Kaffeehaus Salbei](http://www.scillycountryhouse.com/about-us/kaffeehaus/), a German inspired café and guesthouse. When its hot you can get a table outside if you’re lucky or else swelter inside the conservatory. The German Platter is a must, with homemade breads and Bavarian meats and cheeses. Then, of course, one must have either the Apfelstrudel or — my personal favourite — a slice of Sacher Torte.

I swear the cart was noticeably slower after lunch. It was either the weight of the food or the battery had taken a beating from our multiple laps of the island. It was still sufficient to get us to our next destination, a hop, skip and jump away at Pelistry bay. There’s rocks here that line the entire left side of the beach, perfect for climbing. Our inner children couldn’t resist, so Dave and I set off round the headland leaving the girls for a much needed rest.

Later, the cart safely returned with minimal damage and a few miles more on the clock we headed to the Atlantic for dinner, a few drinks and the pub quiz. We’re too drunk (or too stupid) to answer any of the questions well, and “team bum trumpets” inevitably place dead last.

On any other evening, a night-out on Scilly would end with the closing of the pub, but not this night. This night Barry opened the doors to his basement for the world famous Barry’s Disco. It’s not _quite_ as dodgy as it sounds, but is essentially 40-odd drunk, sweaty islanders and a smattering of tourists in a large cellar bar. We grooved the night away. Needless to say, we weren’t in any mood for an early start the next day.

## Day Five

_In 2008 I tagged-along on a trip to Scilly with Katie (then my girlfriend), Katie’s mum, Felicity and Cath._

St Mary’s gpearman28@gmail.com

## Day Six

Visiting Tresco. 

## Day Seven

Travelling home

*[RMV]: Royal Mail Vessel
*[UK]: United Kingdom